Speaker 0: That looks to be good.  Do you want to do a test or is it all...  

Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, I think I can see the bars moving up and down.  So this is Jonathan Carker interviewing Cheryl Jones on 30th September at Grand Union's magnificent Bothy.  So just to confirm before we proceed that you're okay with me recording our chat.  and okay with the recording being held in an archive for possible further use.  

Speaker 0: Yes, yeah.  Thank you very much.  

Speaker 1: So, kicking off, what are your earliest recollections of Digbeth and Eastside, both from a personal and professional perspective?  

Speaker 0: So, like, I've been in Birmingham for quite a long time.  And I guess I moved... Yeah, I went to Wolverhampton University.  I lived in Bromsgrove before that, so I used to come to Birmingham a lot as a teenager and come clubbing as a later teenager in my early 20s and then moved back to Birmingham from Wolverhampton in 2000.  And I think my earliest recollections from that period of Digbeth are the bullring being knocked down and be in a big old hole in the ground.  So it was like an inverse Colosseum in a way.  It was amazing.  And then there was this like kind of quite rickety walkway that was like covered in like hoarding, essentially, that got you across the big hole from the city centre down into Digbeth.  And Digbeth felt much further away from the city centre at that point.  It was quite strange, like what that, yeah, not having that shopping centre there did.  And we used to come to a space, it was Birmingham Voluntary Service Council, which is still there, I think, at the moment.  It feels very close to the city centre now.  It's right by St Martin's Church, just over the Ring Road.  And Jo Capper, who works with me here at Grand Union, actually, was running an arts space within that building, so in their foyer.  which was like a big open space in the middle, and they used to have rooms that they would hire out for conferences, so that space would get used for refreshments, but Jo had set up with a couple of fellow students at BCU, UCE at that time, like a programme of exhibitions, so they used to invite artists to come and make work specifically for that space, and used to have little openings in the evening, so yeah, one of my earliest memories of coming down here in that period is coming to openings there and going across this sort of rickety walkway and it feeling absolutely miles away from city center and.  I later took on that space from Joe.  she handed it over to me and my partner matt and we started like programming some of the work there.  And I guess that's like where I started curating really.  And yeah, sort of the beginnings of where I've got to now with Grand Union.  

Speaker 1: So what especially drew you to the area?  Was it a number of things or?  

Speaker 0: Yeah, I guess like in terms of Grand Union and setting up here, we were drawn to the area.  So that was back in like 2008.  We were looking for space down here.  And there were a few other art spaces down here.  So at that point, Vivid Projects had a space on the corner of Heathmill Lane and Faisley Street.  Eastside Projects had just opened a bit further down on Heathmill Lane.  And Icon had a space called Icon Eastside on Faisley Street in the building that Faisley Studios is in now.  So there was this like little hub of arts activity that we used to come down to and go to openings and it felt there was something going on down here.  So when we wanted to set up a gallery and studios, we were like, well, we want to be in the vicinity of that because there's a little cluster of activity.  So we'd started like looking for property down here and we ended up in Minerva Works.  This building was pretty empty at that point.  I think after the sort of 2007 crash, Or just before that, they'd cleared all of the tenants out of here because they were going to knock it down and build a sort of, I think it was flats that were going to be built here at that point.  But obviously the crash happened and that wasn't viable anymore.  And so there was a lot of empty space here.  And actually, Bob Gosch, who works at K4 Architects just up the road, pointed us in the direction of this space.  He knew one of the people that was in the group at that point.  So that's what, what kind of drew us specifically here to Minerva works.  Um, but I guess on a more like personal level, like Digba's always been quite interesting, I think, because it's always been this place that's felt a bit, um, left alone in some ways.  And it's got like its own sort of little, um, ecologies and ecosystems that pop up by people in the city doing different things that may be like slightly more underground or like off off center a bit like a mainstream and you can sort of be left alone to do it here.  so i think that was a bit of a draw and i guess going back to your previous question i used to come to this area like in my late teens go into some of the clubs in this area and again that sort of activity um always happened down here because there's not much residential.  you're not disturbing anyone.  you know It's like the perfect place for it.  It was quite a long answer, wasn't it?  No, it was a very good answer.  

Speaker 1: And do you have, sort of building a little bit on the kind of memory of the inverse coliseum of the Bullring, do you have any other sort of vivid memories or stories of the area that particularly stand out for you as sort?  of?  you know, either memorable or landmark or, oh, that made a bit of an impact or something like that.  

Speaker 0: Yeah, I guess there's been so many over the years, trying to think of a real specific example.  I might just have to mull that over and let something come to the top as we're talking.  

Speaker 1: It doesn't obviously have to be, you know, kind of, you know, when Elvis visited or whatever, but... But yeah, just something that lodges in your mind.  

Speaker 0: I guess like we've obviously worked with a lot of artists in this area and it's a real, because of the layers of history here, there's like real rich pickings in terms of things for artists to respond to.  So a really interesting artist we worked with probably back in about 2014, I would guess, was Phil Hession.  So he is from Belfast and he came over to do like a residency here.  Really interesting artist and musician.  And he had got a contraption on the back of his bike that he brought over from Belfast to kind of make, you know, how vinyl records are made.  They're like sound is cut into the material.  He was doing this on these old, they were like the first DVDs.  I can't remember the name of the format, but they look like big CDs or big DVDs.  They were like 12 inch size DVDs.  And he brought his contraption so that he could cut sound into that, that he was recording in the area.  So we made like field recordings essentially around Digbuth and some of those, yeah, we're just like recording the sounds of the place of which there's lots because of a lot of the industry around here.  he was also going and meeting different people that were based around here doing different stuff.  so he met some like young musicians who were from access to music college up the road and recorded them making music.  um he visited friction arts who were based over in cheapside and yeah collected stories with some of the communities that they work with.  he'd like bump into people on the streets and record sounds as well.  so yeah i guess at that point we were really um thinking about Digbeth as this place that was like about to change.  at that point it wasn't really changing but wanted to sort of yeah record some of what was here.  

Speaker 1: You've actually partially answered my next question, but maybe we could expand on it a bit.  But how has Dig Within Eastside shaped your work?  I think you've given a little bit of a description of that.  Are there other aspects that came and went and other aspects that are still motivating and around you?  

Speaker 0: Yeah, I think so.  Like I said about that residency programme, we were really thinking about this area.  that's really interesting in and of itself.  And I sort of described in one of the earlier questions how it's sort of left alone a bit.  So these pockets of activity appear that might not be able to appear elsewhere.  So we really wanted to record that in some way.  So we've brought a lot of artists and asked them specifically to think about the area and what it is and what it might mean to them as people coming often from outside of Birmingham coming into the area and really enjoying the area for what it is because they can see the kind of layers of what's here as well.  So yeah, like really directly we've, we've asked artists to respond to that.  Um, so that's shaped the way that we've worked.  Um, also obviously being so close to the canals that has shaped the way we work, cause that brings a whole nother like thing to, to work with.  And so, you know, we have brought people down here on boats or like way back actually in 2012, perhaps.  we actually had some artists who worked on a kayak.  So they were taking people out on a kayak along the canals on these sort of tours to sort of, yeah, they'd developed a sort of tour of the area from their perspective.  And then we're taking people out on these like, yeah, guided tours of the canal on a, on a kayak, which was a really lovely, really lovely project.  And then obviously the history, you know, all of the layers of history here have really affected the way that we work.  and actually Alberta who, designed the Bothy that we're sat in.  This has been part of a wider project.  So she's made a film that's up in the gallery at the moment.  And she's been really considering the history around here in particularly related to the idea of Commonwealth as well and what that means and the different communities here in Birmingham and what that idea of Commonwealth means to those.  And some of those really difficult and problematic histories as part of that.  And actually we went to the gunproofing house to have a sort of tour and a talk from the curator there.  So the gunproofing house is just off Faisley Street as well, just up the road.  Um, and really talked about the history of that industry, really.  I mean, it's still working gun proofing house, which is quite a weird thing to think that that's happening just over the road.  And every now and then you can hear like gunshots from the testing.  Um, but you know, he talked about the rise of that industry in Birmingham and obviously there's a lot of metal working in the area that was like, yeah, providing, you know, it was a supply and demand thing for gun making, but then obviously the, the, um, the trade for guns was really supported by slavery and like yeah.  so Alberta really sort of looked into the history of that and references some of that in her film as well and and then makes the kind of really direct relation with the the way that people have been treated or their experience of the city as people you know, from different backgrounds, in particular, Caribbean backgrounds.  And yeah, the film features an interview with Mrs.  Eunice McGee-Belgrave, who is like a big character from Birmingham, has done lots of amazing community work, is in her 90s now.  So moved as part of the Windrush generation.  And she speaks really candidly about her really difficult experience when she first moved here.  So yeah, a very long answer again, which I could go on all day really about the different artists that we've worked with and their...  

Speaker 1: I think that'd be a lovely route to go.  

Speaker 0: Yeah, their response to this particular area.  

Speaker 1: Did that emerge particularly through the Commonwealth Games or was it something that had been worked on or thought about previously?  

Speaker 0: We've been talking to Alberta for quite a long time about working with her and the opportunity came up through the Commonwealth Games and their cultural programme to get a big chunk of funding to be able to fund like what has become a really big project to be honest.  and yeah building this bothy has been part of that.  

Speaker 1: Actually could you for the record just kind of describe about the bothy?  

Speaker 0: Of course yeah.  so the artist we've been working with is Alberta Whittle and she is Barbadian and was born there as a child, but came to live in Britain when she was younger, lived in Birmingham for a period of time as a young person and now is based up in Scotland.  And as part of the project we've been working on, we have a garden next to the canal called the Minerva Garden, and it's an apothecary garden.  And we have been working with a group of women from vulnerable backgrounds.  they come to us weekly to have sessions in the garden with an artist gardener facilitator and they've been learning about the properties of the plants, the histories and traditional uses of the plants and they've been making their own teas and balms and dyes.  actually, they've been making artworks from dyes from the plants as well.  And so Alberta has been involved on and off with that group as well and has come and worked with them and talked to them about their experience of working here.  And together with them has designed this bossy structure that we're sat in.  So it's like a high-end shed, I would guess.  And the idea is that it's a space that's used by that women's group for rest and respite so they have a code to the door.  they can come and use it at any time that they want to but they also do their workshops in here on a Wednesday and use it for that.  and the outside design is based on the design of a Barbadian chattel house so it's brightly coloured it's bright blue and pink on the outside and has like a corrugated tin roof.  but then this idea of the bothy like a a Scottish bothy is a place that, you know, ramblers come, come across these sort of little stone cottages and they've been, um, they've been put out and provided by, well, I guess by the landowners.  I don't actually, um, but there are spaces that those ramblers can stay overnight and there's, They're usually full with wood and there's water supply and you can go and rest for a little while before you go back on your rambling again.  You just have to leave it stocked up for the next person.  So yeah, the sort of concept of that was what Alberta was thinking about when she designed the space.  

Speaker 1: Were there some other inspirations that the artist drew from Digbeth that you can recall?  

Speaker 0: Well I guess that she was thinking about Digbeth as this space, this sort of unloved or unwatched space and actually we wanted to put the body out for anyone to use out in public space somewhere, but yeah, it was too difficult to do for us in the end.  But there were quite a lot of, there were a lot of charities around here actually that help people that are in vulnerable positions, particularly people that are in vulnerable housing situations or don't have a home.  and support them, and I guess that Alberta was thinking about that when she was thinking about this idea of a space to be able to be used by anyone for rest and respite.  But yeah, that was just a bit beyond what we could manage really, so we've sort of compromised a little bit and made this space for the people that we're working with, but you know there's a code on the door, we can let anybody that have the code to the door so they can come and use it, so It means that if we have people come to the gallery or work with us that need a space to pray, for instance, they can come and do that here.  Or if someone just needs a bit of time out or some quiet time or space for breastfeeding, all of it, it means that we've got this place to be able to enable people to do that as well.  So I guess, yeah, indirectly, I think, yeah, Alberta was thinking about Digbeth itself as well.  

Speaker 1: So there's a sort of flexibility and adaptability.  Are there some features or which type of features or aspects of Digbeth do you think inspire or stimulate or frustrate at the same time?  

Speaker 0: Oh, so much.  I guess that's what we said, like the canals are... have been quite a big inspiration for us and the kind of the biodiversity that's there and this sort of yeah quiet space away from the city and it's quite interesting.  if you've ever done the walk from here to the jewellery quarter along the canals you know you're in a very busy city you're kind of right next to big ring roads but actually in this really quiet space where you can hear birdsong and yeah it's a very inspiring space for those different reasons.  I think the industrial history in particular and the fabric of the buildings and the history of what's happened in the buildings as well has been a big inspiration to us and is of great interest.  and you know the city that we live in is built on those industrial histories and all their problems so kind of looking at that and unpicking it a little bit and trying to Like involve different people that live in the city to to think about those things as well, and the direct or indirect sort of effect that that has on our society and situation.  now I think it's been really inspiring to us and that I mean the the actual sort of physicality of dig birth itself and.  sometimes is great and is you know it's really interesting place to walk around because it is a bit like unkept and unlooked after um in the way that other parts of the city are and that that makes it really interesting for lots of reasons.  but it also makes it quite difficult space.  so i've got young kids and when they're not in push chairs anymore but when they were i remember coming down here in push chairs and it's  

Speaker 1: a flipping night  

Speaker 0: because either it's like uneven ground or it's a bit, we always say it's a bit wild west down here because parking, you know, you can park on the pavements and nobody's going to give you a ticket.  So you're like, yeah, I'm trying to get around all of these things.  So yeah, I sort of think, you know, if somebody has mobility issues or is on a wheelchair, like it's a nightmare to get around and that is quite frustrating.  I've also been thinking about the lighting because it can, I guess a lot of people don't come to Digbeth because it's a bit hostile in lots of ways, like the lighting's not good, the sort of public infrastructure isn't great.  And so we've been sort of thinking about how we might address some of that as well.  And we do as a Digbeth access group, it's like, a group made up of lots of different people in the area.  so like businesses and like the um friends of the earth that based in digbeth part of that and the council and we sort of got together to try and think about how we might address some of these issues because particularly the work that's happening now for hst and the metro has made it even more difficult for us to attract people down to this space.  So we've got a funding bid in for a lighting project that we co-designed with Intervention Architecture and ourselves and the input of all the people on that Digbeth Access Group to create a wayfinding scheme through light.  So using different coloured lights to make different pathways to different places in Digbeth from the city centre.  Yeah, I've gone off on a tangent again, haven't I?  

Speaker 1: Engines are good because that shows where some of your inspiration is coming from, what sticks in your head.  

Speaker 0: Yeah, so we're trying to turn those frustrations, I guess, into inspiration for it and use art and our sort of cultural capital to be able to try and address some of those solutions in interesting ways.  So, yeah, you know, it's not about the council just putting straightforward lighting again.  How can we make that a bit more useful and interesting at the same time?  It becomes a thing in itself rather than just... a sort of background infrastructure thing.  

Speaker 1: I mentioned about the inspirations and you spoke of the industrial heritage and the canals and those drawing out the creativity.  Can you give an example or a couple of the types of ways in which that knowledge or awareness is drawn out or accessed by artists?  

Speaker 0: I've already mentioned Alberta and her project and us going to speak to different people in the area and find out a bit more about their knowledge and history.  But we've also, with artists and members of staff, gone to Birmingham Archives and done some more thorough research on things there.  We're actually trying to develop Junction March, which is a canal office and warehouse building on Faisley Street.  And it's a grade two listed building.  It's been derelict for many years.  And we've recently acquired the lease on it and have started the process of redeveloping it in the hope that it will be Grand Union's home in the end.  And as part of that, we had a whole heritage report written.  Yeah, we've got this sort of pretty detailed history of that building and what it is and what it does.  So that's, again, something that we can provide to artists to sort of look through and use as part of their research for their work.  

Speaker 1: Is that the one that says Canal House on the front?  On the front, yeah.  It's been painted right today.  

Speaker 0: Yes, exactly.  So we've just finished like phase one works on it and we've renovated the front part as offices for creative businesses.  So there is fully occupied at the minute.  Um, yeah, the painting's just being finished at the front at the moment.  Um, and so, yeah, we're generating income through those, um, businesses being there and we're now fundraising to do the back parts.  So there's like big, two big buildings on the back.  Um, and eventually we'll have artist studios and new gallery space and a cafe event space there.  if we raise all the money that we need to.  And it will be fully accessible in a way that the building that we have here isn't at the moment.  So yeah, that's our plans for that.  

Speaker 1: That sounds brilliant and that's in a way addressing part of my next question which is in what ways has the area changed?  You've mentioned a little bit of what's sort of emerging, what's disappeared and what significant things?  

Speaker 0: Yeah well like I guess you know that I talked about those sort of early memories and us wanting to be down here because those are the arts organisations were here.  and yeah icon east side isn't here anymore.  vivid projects has moved into minerva works now so isn't on the corner there um and in in some ways that like the changes that have happened at minerva works have been great.  so this was pretty empty when we moved in.  but now is a really thriving hub of different arts organizations and fabricators.  and There's this amazing like little mini ecology that's here, I guess.  And the great thing for artists and art galleries and arts organisations being in Digbeth is that there's still light industry here.  So we can get things fabricated on the doorstep, like literally on the doorstep.  It's brilliant.  There's a steel powder coat over the road that we work with often.  There's like galvanizers that we've had material from before.  There's like wood yards, not very far away.  Like it's a really, I keep saying it's like halcyon days at the minute because we've got this great ecology, an ecosystem that sort of supports itself.  And these light industry businesses that their business has been changing and they're quite interested in finding these new things that they can work on.  And they're quite interesting little side projects for them as well.  So they're interested in doing that.  However, because of the big redevelopment that's happening in the area, HS2, the Metro, there are more developers that are interested in the area, which is good.  There's good projects happening, like the Bond has been rebuilt as we speak, so there's a big media hub going in there.  You can see it at the end there.  Yeah, so that building there, that pitch is actually a new pitch that's been built in the last year.  So there's a big media hub going on there.  

Speaker 1: And that's on Faisley Street.  

Speaker 0: That's on Faisley Street, yeah, just down the road.  

Speaker 1: was the typhoon building?  

Speaker 0: no the typhoon buildings like over the road that way.  that was the bond.  so there's like a canal inlet there and it's always been a space that's um has lots of different businesses and conferencing rooms and they've got like a lovely light old courtyard.  so um so they used to have like a little cafe there and they've done.  they do weddings and stuff there but they like have invested a lot of money in redoing it.  and there was this part of the building that was um it was just the shell of the building and a few rafters but no roof on it.  but they've completely rebuilt it so it's going to be a working building.  um so those things are great and it means that there's more people in the area because as i've mentioned it could be quite quiet and a little bit intimidating.  so there's loads more people.  it feels much more vibrant.  there's more bars and restaurants and stuff here, which is good.  However, the rents are slowly rising and a lot of the organisations that are here, like arts organisations, like those charities that help vulnerable people, have been here because of the cheap rents.  And as things rise, it becomes unviable for us to be here.  So yeah, this is like the other side of it, this amazing community that we've got and we're part of.  feels like it's kind of slowly being, I don't think purposely pushed out because I think a lot of the developers and the city wants this type of activity to stay in the area because it's what makes the character of it.  However, it's going to be difficult to find viable options for that.  So part of us taking on Junctionworks is to try and like stay here, find a way that we can actually stay here and have an asset here and continue to build on this like decades of work that we've done and community building that we've done.  But yeah, we hope that we're not just the only ones left here.  Other people will be as well.  And the light industry that's around here, you know, I think at some point it's not probably going to fit the mould of stuff that's happening around here.  So that's, you know, that will probably move out of the city, which is a shame because like I said, the ecosystem that is here at the moment feels really good, really strong and really interesting.  But yeah, we'll see how long it lasts or how, I guess it's what the city values and what the developers kind of value.  There's always those tensions within those things, isn't there?  And maybe more interesting stuff will come out of that, but we shall see.  

Speaker 1: You've really touched on a fair bit of it, but can you describe some continuities or constants that, from your experience, sort of remain in Digbeth?  

Speaker 0: Yeah, well, I guess, yeah, like I've said, the architecture.  It remains constant and because it's conservation area, you know, a lot of that architecture has to be respected.  So I think that there will be some like higher rise stuff that happens in the area.  But I think my understanding is that the council and the planning team are keen to keep it.  a low rise area and keen to keep the sort of physical feel of Digbeth as it is.  And it feels like that will remain constant.  The graffiti has been a constant ever since we've been here.  Um, and you know, I got like very mixed feelings about graffiti.  Like I sort of, um, aesthetically, I don't mind it.  Um, like conceptually, I don't mind it.  Um, But then I guess the frustrating thing with that is like we've done projects that are outside and about and put signage up about those projects and it just gets graffitied over and you're like, well, you know, we're not a big sort of capitalist monster.  We're a small arts charity trying to do some interesting things.  So it can get frustrating.  But yeah, that does seem to be like a constant battle that happens between the graffiti artists and, the people that are trying to do other things here.  I guess the interesting thing is the tension between developers and graffiti at the moment, because a lot of developers are using that idea of culture and that graffiti aesthetic to sell their visions.  But in doing that, they're using a lot of the graffiti artist's work in their like visual visions.  but the graffiti artists aren't getting any credit or payment or reciprocal benefit for that and then actually you know they'll continue to lose space to to be able to do their work.  so there's lots of interesting tensions there i think.  um i do know one graffiti artist who has been like serving like cease and desist orders on people.  So her work keeps popping up in developers like visions and she's like, well, you haven't paid me for this.  You've got no right to use it.  You know, um, you've either got to pay me or stop using it.  And it's been taken legal action.  There's a whole kind of, yeah.  Interesting set of problems and tensions there as well.  

Speaker 1: Is that Lucy?  

Speaker 0: Uh, no, it's not an animatronics.  Maybe I shouldn't be saying that on the, on the thing, but there we go.  Um, she's spoken publicly about that on Twitter.  So I don't think it's an issue.  Um, I've forgotten the thread of what I was saying.  What was the question?  

Speaker 1: Oh, like intellectual property.  Yeah.  

Speaker 0: Yeah.  What was your original question though?  We were talking about constant continuity.  So yeah, you know, the canals obviously is like physical thing.  that won't in it in and of itself won't really change although i think that over the next 10 years we probably will see it more opened out and and kind of um celebrated a bit more like the river ray as well.  but i don't know if you can see out here but we're just looking out the window of the body and this point is where the river ray which is very overgrown and a bit of a trickle goes underneath the canal here.  yeah so that wall there is like the the canals just beyond that.  So this is a, yeah, a bridge that the canal goes over.  I always think it's a really interesting bit.  

Speaker 1: Layers of water.  Yeah.  

Speaker 0: Yeah.  Like I've never seen that physically before.  I'm like, yeah, that's really interesting kind of part of Digbeth.  Um, the railway arches, you know, all of those like very physical things are a constant.  And I think up until now, and hopefully to continue this like idea that there's these pockets of subculture that happen in Digbeth.  And although they might not be the same subcultures all the time, these subcultures, they pop up and go, but some of them remain constant.  But yeah, the way that this area of the city is used, I'm a big fan of, and I hope that that doesn't disappear altogether.  I hope we can still make room for that to happen.  

Speaker 1: We've covered a lot of ground already, but is there anything that you'd like to express or mention, thoughts and ideas that we haven't spoken about yet?  Things that you're itching to say.  

Speaker 0: I think that that was my big thing, but like saying about the subcultures that are here and that I really hope that... I do think that city planners and developers are starting to recognise the value in keeping those things happening and that actually it creates a sense of place.  It creates an individual personality for a place and that ultimately that drives up the value of a place in economic terms, but also in social and cultural terms.  And yeah, it feels like we're in this... battle.  we're trying for it not to be a battle for it not to be like the old battle that happens all the time these like cycles of people going and creating an interesting place and then everyone gets interested in developers come and develop it and kind of sanitize it and all that culture sort of starts again somewhere else.  I really hope that this is the point where that stops happening and that yeah there is room made for things to coexist.  I'm sure that that has happened elsewhere.  I can't think of an example off the top of my head, but yeah, I really want that to stay.  

Speaker 1: That's a brilliant place to finish actually.  On an optimistic.  
